---
title: SURVIVAL
image: blackhole.jpg
folder: survival
date: 2020-08-01
---

## PETER LILLIAN
## AUGUST 2020

The poor tiny snail must have been born there, in our trash can. I knew
it would die there, too, if I didn’t do anything. And so the next ten
minutes of my life were spent coaxing it onto the back of some spam mail
I found lying on the counter. After walking outside carefully—he had
refused to stick onto the paper and his shell was sliding around the
words “URGENT OPEN NOW”—I made my way across the lawn. Poor snail. Just
as I was trying to shake it off, it finally stuck onto the paper. As
ungrateful as it was, eventually its sloppy trail led off the envelope,
attracted by another snail that it seemed to like very much. Thus the
snail was saved from a short life in the garbage.

I figured I’d leave them to their business.

I turned around heroically to go back inside, but only a few steps from
the door my foot was met by a faint crunch. I could feel the snail guts
dripping off my bare toes.

It’s just how morbidly poetic the whole damn thing was. I save a snail
only to kill another. But we aren’t that different from them. Made up of
cells containing simpler cells, multitudes of molecules made up of atoms
upon atoms. We look for food and shelter, just as the snail did in the
trash. We seek love, just as he did on the lawn. The snail wants
survival and reproduction, same as all living beings.

But we’re so different from the snail that it couldn’t dream of
recognizing us as even alive. Its senses are limited to what would be
useful in its snail world. I could never explain to the snail what I had
done, or even what a trash can was.

So am I a god to this snail? Possibly. But if we’re in turn minuscule
next to the sheer weight of the universe, how can we say we’re the top
of the pyramid? Is there a limit to complexity? We can easily imagine a
being slightly less complex, less intelligent than ourselves. And just
as easily one slightly more so. Clearly that being could imagine an even
greater being. As technology improves, it seems only a matter of time
until these beings exist and begin climbing the pyramid higher and
higher.

That’s a story for another time though. Is there a cap to the pyramid?
Even if the universe is infinite, in about 10<sup>100</sup> years the
last black hole will fizzle out of existence, and the cosmos will become
cold and dark for eternity [\[1\]](#ref-frautschi1982entropy).
Eventually there will be no usable energy or mass—the concept of time
will become meaningless in this sea of maximum entropy.

But before this happens, our civilization will continue to advance. Our
descendants will become more intelligent at an increasing rate as we
spread throughout the galaxies. It’s likely that by harvesting energy
from black holes [\[2\]](#ref-penrose1971extraction),
[\[3\]](#ref-press1972floating), we’ll be able to persist for the
10<sup>100</sup> years until they fizzle away. And during this
unimaginable timespan, there will eventually emerge beings that *we*
would consider gods. Life on Earth has only existed for several billion
years [\[4\]](#ref-mojzsis1996evidence)—imagine how far life could
progress in a billion billion billion years. Now add 30 more billions.

Beings that much more advanced than us would certainly see us as we see
the snail. We wouldn’t be able to comprehend what they were any more
than the snail can comprehend us.

But we do know one thing about them. The supreme task for these beings
will be to find a way of escaping the heat death of the universe.
Somehow it may be possible to reverse the march of entropy or even find
a way to leave this universe.

So it’s funny—these gods will use their powers to search for energy, a
new universe, a way to keep living. Food, shelter, reproduction. Just
like the snail.

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[1\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">S. Frautschi, “Entropy in an expanding
universe,” *Science*, vol. 217, no. 4560, pp. 593–599, 1982.</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[2\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">R. Penrose and R. Floyd, “Extraction of
rotational energy from a black hole,” *Nature Physical Science*, vol.
229, no. 6, pp. 177–179, 1971.</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[3\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">W. H. Press and S. A. Teukolsky, “Floating
orbits, superradiant scattering and the black-hole bomb,” *Nature*, vol.
238, no. 5361, pp. 211–212, 1972.</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[4\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">S. J. Mojzsis, G. Arrhenius, K. McKeegan, T.
Harrison, A. Nutman, and C. Friend, “Evidence for life on earth before
3,800 million years ago,” *Nature*, vol. 384, no. 6604, pp. 55–59,
1996.</span>
